You shall find the time Audrey.
Patience, gentle Audrey.
Faith, the priest was good enough,
for all the old gentleman's saying.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey,
a most vile Martext.
But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest
lays claim to you.
Aye, I know who 'tis.
He hath no interest in me in the world.
Here comes the man you mean.
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown.
By my troth, we that have good wits
have much to answer for.
We shall be flouting; we cannot hold.
Good even, Audrey.
God ye good even, William.
And good even to you, sir.
Good even, gentle friend.
Cover thy head, cover thy head.
Nay, prithee, be covered.
How old are you, friend?
F...
Five and twenty, sir.
A ripe age.
Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name.
Wast born i' the forest here?
Ay, sir, I thank God.
"Thank God"--a good answer.
Art rich?
Faith, sir, so-so.
"So-so" is good, very good, very excellent good,
and yet it is not.
It is but so-so.
Art thou wise?
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayest well.
You do love this maid.
I do, sir.
Give me your hand.
Art thou learned?
No, sir.
Then learn this of me.
To have is to have,
for it is a figure in rhetoric that drink,
being poured out of a cup into a glass,
by filling the one doth empty the other,
for all your writers do consent that ipse is he.
Now, you are not ipse.
I am he.
Which he, sir?
He, sir, that must marry this woman.
Therefore, you clown, abandon--
which is in the vulgar "leave"--
the society--which in the boorish is "company"--
of this female-- which in the common is "woman"--
which together is
abandon the society of this female,
or, clown, thou perishest;
or, to thy better understanding, diest;
or, to wit, I kill thee;
make thee away,
translate thy life into death,
thy liberty into bondage.
I will deal in poison with thee or in bastinado or in steel.
I will bandy with thee in faction.
I will o'errun thee with policy.
I will kill you a hundred and fifty ways!
Therefore, tremble and depart!
Do, good William.
God rest you merry, sir.
Ah! Oh, Ee-yah!
Our master and mistress seeks you.
Come, away, away.
Trip, Audrey. Trip, Audrey.
I attend. I attend.
Is't possible that on so little acquaintance
you should like her?
That but seeing, you should love her?
And loving, woo?
And wooing, she should grant?
And will you persever to enjoy her?
Neither call the giddiness of it in question,
nor the poverty of her, the small acquaintance,
nor my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting;
but say with me, I love Aliena.
Say with her that she loves me.
Consent to it both that we may enjoy each other.
It shall be to your good,
for my father's house and all the revenue
that was old Sir Rowland's will I bestow upon you
and here live and die a shepherd.
You have my consent.
Let your wedding be tomorrow.
Thither will I invite the duke and all's contented followers.
Go you, and prepare Aliena,
for look you,
here comes my Rosalind.
God save you, brother.
And you, fair sister.
O, my dear Orlando,
how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had been wounded
with the claws of a lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon
when he showed me your handkerchief?
Aye, and greater wonders than that.
O, I know where you are.
Nay, 'tis true.
There was never anything so sudden
as the fight of two rams
or Caesar's thrasonical brag of "I came, saw, and overcame,"
for your brother and my sister no sooner met but they looked,
no sooner looked but they loved,
no sooner loved but they sighed,
no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason,
no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy;
and in these degrees
have they made a pair of stairs to marriage
which they will climb incontinent
or else be incontinent before marriage.
They are in the very wrath of love,
and they will together.
Clubs cannot part them.
They shall be married tomorrow,
and I will bid the duke to the nuptial,
but, O, how bitter a thing it is
to look into happiness through another man's eyes.
By so much the more shall I tomorrow
be at the height of heart-heaviness
by how much I shall think my brother happy
in having what he wishes for.
Why then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
Know of me then, I can do strange things.
I have, since I was three year old,
conversed with a magician
most profound in his art and yet not damnable.
If you do love Rosalind
so near the heart as your gesture cries it out,
when your brother marries Aliena,
shall you marry her.
I know into what straits of fortune she is driven,
and it is not impossible to me,
if it appear not inconvenient to you,
to set her before your eyes tomorrow,
human as she is and without any danger.
Speakest thou in sober meanings?
By my life, I do, which I tender dearly,
although I say I am a magician.
Therefore, put you in your best array,
and bid your friends,
for if you will be married tomorrow, you shall,
and to Rosalind, if you will.
Here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
to show the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I have.
It is my study to seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd.
Look on him; love him.
He worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
and so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
all made of passion,
and all made of wishes,
all adoration, duty, and observance,
all humbleness,
all patience and impatience,
all purity,
all trial,
all obedience;
and so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Who do you speak to, "Why blame you me to love you?"
To her that is not here nor doth not hear.
I pray you, no more of this.
It is like the howling of Irish wolves
against the moon.
I will help you, if I can.
I would love you, if I could.
Tomorrow, meet me all together.
I will marry you, if ever I marry woman,
and I'll be married tomorrow.
I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man,
and you shall be married tomorrow.
I will content you,
if what pleases you contents you,
and you shall be married tomorrow.
As you love Rosalind, meet;
as you love Phebe, meet;
and as I love no woman, I'll meet.
So fare you well.
I have left you commands.
I'll not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey.
Tomorrow will we be married.
I do desire it with all my heart,
and I hope it is no dishonest desire
to desire to be a woman of the world.
Here comes two of the banished duke's pages.
Well met, honest gentleman.
By my troth, well met.
Come, sit, sit, in a song.
We are for you; sit i' the middle.
It was a lover and his lass--
with a hey and a ho and a hey nonino
and a hey noni nonino--
that o'er the green corn fields did pass
in springtime, in springtime, in springtime,
the only pretty ring time,
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Between the acres of the rye--
with a hey and a ho and a hey nonino,
and a hey noni nonino--
these pretty country folk would lie
in springtime, in springtime, in springtime,
the only pretty ring time
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
This carol they began that hour--
with a hey and a ho and a hey nonino,
and a hey noni nonino--
how that a life was but a flower
in springtime, in springtime, in springtime,
the only pretty ring time
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
And therefore take the present time--
with a hey and a ho and a hey nonino,
and a hey noni nonino--
for love is crowned with the prime
in springtime, in springtime, in springtime,
the only pretty ring time
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Truly, young gentlemen,
though there was no great matter in the ditty,
yet the note was very untunable.
You are deceived, sir.
We kept time, lost not our time.
By my troth, yes,
I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song.
God by you, and God mend your voices.
Come, Audrey.
Dost thou believe, Orlando,
that the boy can do all this that he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not
as those that fear they hope and know they fear.
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged.
You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
you will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
You say you will have her when I bring her?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing?
That will I should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
you will give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
So is the bargain.
You say you'll have Phebe if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter;
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter.
Keep your word, Phebe, to marry me
or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd.
Keep your word, Silvius,
to marry her if she do refuse me.
And from hence I go to make these doubts all even.
I do remember in this shepherd boy
some lively touches of my daughter's favor.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
methought he was a brother to your daughter.
There is, sure, another flood toward,
and these couples are coming to the ark.
Here comes a pair of very strange beasts
which in all tongues are called fools.
Salutation and greeting to you all!
Good my lord, bid him welcome.
This is the motley-minded gentleman
I have so often met in the forest.
He hath been a courtier, he swears.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation.
I have trod a measure.
I have flattered a lady.
I have been politic with my friend,
smooth with mine enemy.
I have undone three tailors.
I have had four quarrels and like to have fought one.
And how was that ta'en up?
Faith, we met and found our quarrel
was upon the seventh cause.
How seventh cause?
Good my lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God 'ild you, sir.
I desire you of the like.
I press in here, sir,
amongst the rest of the country copulatives,
to swear and to forswear
according as marriage binds and blood breaks,
a poor virgin, sir,
an ill-favored thing, sir, but mine own;
a poor humor of mine, sir,
to take that that no man else will.
Rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir,
in a poor house--
as your pearl in your foul oyster.
Faith, he is very swift and sententious.
But, for the seventh cause--
how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?
Upon a lie seven times removed--
bear your body more seeming, Audrey--
as thus, sir:
I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard.
He sent me word
if I said his beard was not cut well,
he was in the mind it was.
This is called the Retort Courteous.
If I sent him word again "It was not well cut,"
he would send me word, he cut it to please himself.
This is called the Quip Modest.
If again "It was not well cut," he disabled my judgment.
This is called the Reply Churlish.
If again "It was not well cut,"
he would answer I spake not true.
This is called the Reproof Valiant.
If again "It was not well cut," he would say I lie.
This is called the Countercheque Quarrelsome,
and so to the Lie Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct,
and so we measured swords and parted.
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord?
He's as good at anything and yet a fool.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse
and under the presentation of that,
he shoots his wit.
Then is there mirth in heaven
when earthly things made even atone together.
Good duke, receive thy daughter.
Hymen from heaven brought her,
yea, brought her hither
that thou mightst join her hand with his
whose heart within his bosom is.
To you, I give myself, for I am yours.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true,
why then, my love, adieu.
I'll have no father if you be not he.
I'll have no husband if you be not he...
nor ne'er wed woman if you be not she.
Peace, ho.
I bar confusion.
'Tis I must make conclusion
of these most strange events.
Here's eight that must take hands
to join in Hymen's bands
if truth holds true contents.
You and you no cross shall part.
You and you are heart in heart.
You to his love must accord
or have a woman to your lord.
You and you are sure together
as the winter to foul weather.
Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing,
feed yourselves with questioning
that reason wonder may diminish
how thus we met and these things finish.
Wedding is great Juno's crown,
O blessed bond of board and bed.
'Tis Hymen peoples every town.
High wedlock then be honored.
Honor, high honor, and renown
to Hymen, god of every town.
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me.
Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.
I will not eat my word now thou art mine.
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two.
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland
that bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick,
hearing how that every day
men of great worth resorted to this forest,
address'd a mighty power,
which were on foot, in his own conduct,
purposely to take his brother here
and put him to the sword,
and to the skirts of this wild wood, he came,
where, meeting with an old religious man,
after some question with him
was converted
both from his enterprise
and from the world,
his crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother
and all their lands restored to them again
that were with him exiled.
This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome, young man.
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding.
To the one his lands withheld
and to the other a land itself at large,
a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest, let us do those ends
which here were well begun and well begot:
and after, every of this happy number
that have endured shrewd days and nights with us
shall share the good of our returned fortune
according to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity
and fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music!
And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
with measure heap'd in joy,
to the measures fall.
Sir, by your patience.
If I heard you rightly, the duke hath put on a religious life
and thrown into neglect the pompous court?
He hath.
To him will I.
Out of these convertites,
there is much matter to be heard and learn'd.
You to your former honor I bequeath.
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
You to a love that your true faith doth merit.
You to your land and love and great allies.
You to a long and well-deserved bed.
And you to wrangling,
for thy loving voyage is but for two months victuall'd.
So, to your pleasures.
I am for other than for dancing measures.
Stay, Jaques, stay.
To see no pastime I, what you will have,
I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.
Proceed, proceed.
We will begin these rites as we do trust they'll end,
in true delights.
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue,
but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue.
If it be true that good wine needs no bush,
'tis true that a good play needs no epilogue.
Yet to good wine, they do use good bushes,
and a good play proves the better
by the help of good epilogue.
What a case am I in then that am neither a good epilogue
nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play.
I am not furnished like a beggar.
Therefore, to beg will not become me.
My way is to conjure you,
and I'll begin with the women.
I charge you, O women, for the love you bear to men,
to like as much of this play as please you;
and I charge you, O men, for the love you bear to women--
as I perceive by your simpering none of you hates them--
that between you and the women, the play may please.
If I were a woman,
I would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me,
complexions that liked me, and breaths that I defied not;
and as many of you as have good beards or good faces or sweet breaths
will, for my kind offer, when I make curtsy,
bid me farewell.